|-ASTER DSL SPECIFICATION, v1.0--------------------------------------JULY 2026-|

TABLE OF CONTENTS

    1: Preamble
    2: Definitions
        2.1: General
        2.2: Compilation
        2.3: Syntax
            2.3.1: Types
    3: Figures
        3.1: Format
    4: Symbols
    5: Values
        5.1: Scalar
        5.2: List
        5.3: Code
        5.4: Declaration
    6: Expressions
    7: Types
        7.1: Concrete
        7.2: Identifier
        7.3: Alias
        7.4: Structural
    8: Variables

1 PREAMBLE

        This document should serve as the absolute authority on the syntax and
    behavior of the Aster programming language and its compiler(s). Any
    ambiguity in the specification should be 1. alerted to the maintainers of
    the DSL, and 2. best-faith interpreted until a fix is available. If you
    have a question about the specification or language, please open an issue in
    the Aster project repository (available at time of writing at
    <https://codeberg.org/eviessh/aster>) or contact the lead maintainer at
    <eviessh@protonmail.com>.

        This is not meant as a tutorial, instead as an exhaustive technical
    specification and resource for those wishing to implement a compiler / tool
    for the language, or interface with it more efficiently. Please see the
    relevant Aster manual page(s) for proper tutorials on the language's
    features.

2 DEFINITIONS
    
    2.1 GENERAL:

    - DSL: Domain-specific language.
    - Program: A unit of code compiled or interpreted together to achieve a
      function or solve a problem.
    - Standard: An idea or semantic defined by this specification.
    - Value: A solid definition of some kind of data.
    - Expression: A piece of code that produces a value.

    2.2 COMPILATION:

    - Compiler: In the context of this specification, a processor used to turn
      human-readable source code into valid assembly.
    - Assembler: A program that takes assembly and translates it into machine
      code.
    - Linker: A program that takes machine code with unresolved external symbols
      and resolves their location in the environment.

    2.3 SYNTAX:

    - Symbol: Any string of characters to be used for a defined purpose.
    - Identifier: Any symbol used to provide readable meaning to an address.
    - Keyword: A symbol used to communicate a semantic purpose to the processor.
    - Operator: A symbol used to direct, input-output purpose to the processor.
    - Variable: Any identifier associated with a piece of data, explicitly for
      the purpose of manipulation in some way.
    - Constant: Any identifier associated with a piece of data that will never
      be changed during the program's runtime.
    - Function: A set of code defined separate to its direct usage environment
      used for a single, specific purpose.
    - Conditional: A potential fork in program execution spurred by a situation
      in the environment.
    - Loop: A piece of code to be potentially executed more than once directly
      sequentially.

        2.3.1 TYPES

        - Type: Any identifier associated with a tag for data meant to give
          context to the processor.
        - Concrete: Any type that specifically decides the count or pattern of
          bits present in a piece of data.
        - Alias: Any type that directly aliases another type with no directly
          added functionality.
        - Structural: Any type that defines symbolic names for values or offsets
          associated with important portions of the affected data.

3 FIGURES

        The figures contained within this document should be considered to be in
    the following format of expression. Any errors should be reported to
    language standard maintainers.

    3.1 FORMAT:

        For a format figure, like those for function or variable declarations,
    the following format should be assumed.

    - The enclosing delimiter "<" shall be used to make known that a portion of
      the format is required.
    - The enclosing delimiter "{" shall be used to make known that a portion of
      the format is optional.
    - The enclosing delimiter '"' shall be used to make known that a string
      shall be taken literally.
    - The use of the string "identifier" shall be used to make known that this
      portion of the format can be any string usable as an identifier (S 2.3
      "Identifier").
    - The use of the string "type" shall be used to make known that this portion
      of the format must be a valid type identifier.
    - The use of the string "// ..." shall be used to denote code not shown for
      the purpose of brevity or generalization.
    - The use of the string "{...}" shall be used to make known that the
      previous portion of the format continues indefinitely, or until another
      portion explicitly begins.
    - The use of the characters ",", ".", ":", ";", "(", ")", "[", "]", and "="
      shall be used to denote themselves literally.
    - The use of a space or newline character shall be used to denote any
      white-space character, though they may sometimes be intentional to denote
      best practices, and should be taken as required unless enclosed on one
      side by an operator.

    Any other string should be taken to be explanatory.

4 SYMBOLS

        A symbol may be defined using any mix of alphanumeric character save for
    contiguous strings that may constitute a reserved operator. This has the
    additional caveat of the fact that the symbol may not be entirely numeric,
    as it would then be considered a numeric scalar by a processor.

        An Aster DSL program may not define a symbol that would alias any
    standard keyword or operator, or any identifier otherwise explicitly
    declared reserved by this standard. It MAY define an alias for standard
    library functions, types, or variables, as long as they do not include the
    relevant standard library portion in that translation unit. If an invalid
    symbol is consumed by the processor, it must refuse to compile that section
    of code until the issue is resolved.

        No symbol may be defined "reserved" by the compiler beyond those defined
    in this standard to be specifically reserved. The presence of non-standard
    reserved keywords is indicative of a non-standard compliant compiler, and
    the output of said compiler should not be considered guaranteed correct by
    the Aster DSL organization.

5 VALUES

        There are several types of "values" defined in this specification. Each
    is used in a wildly different situation, but all remain "values" (S 2.1
    "Value").

    5.1 SCALAR

        A scalar value is defined as a number or symbol of some kind. This can
    include references to variables or functions, integers (hexadecimal or
    decimal), fractional numbers (which must be in decimal format), binary
    literals, or characters.

        In order to write a hexadecimal literal, prefix a string made up of the
    characters 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, A, B, C, D, E, or F with the string
    "0x". For a fractional literal, prefix a string made up of the characters 0,
    1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, or '.' with "0f". Note that a fractional literal
    may only have on '.' character to signify the decimal point. For a binary
    literal, prefix a string made up of the characters 0 and 1 with "0b".

        The bit width of scalar literals will be decided as the smallest amount
    of bits that could represent the specified number, for example for 0xF it
    would be 4, for 0b10 2, and for 0f23.2 16.

    5.2 LIST

        A list value is defined as a comma-separated list of symbols.

    5.3 CODE

        A code value is defined as a block of executable code. This code block
    can contain its own variables, in which case it will be allocated its own
    stack frame. It may also contain other code blocks.

    5.4 DECLARATION

        A declaration value is defined as a block of variable declarations of
    some kind. These declarations may optionally have definitions, whose
    semantic meaning will be decided by the scope the list operates within.

5 EXPRESSIONS

        Expressions are the base unit of functionality in the DSL. Each
    expression will plainly either produce a value or produce some kind of
    output, be it in terms of program state or outside state somehow. Each
    expression in the DSL must be delimited by a '.' character non-optionally.

7 TYPES

        There are three defined classes of type in this specification,
    "concrete" (S 2.3.1, "Concrete"), "identifier" (S 2.3 "Identifier"), "alias"
    (S 2.3.1, "Alias"), and "structural" (S 2.3.1, "Structural").

    7.1 CONCRETE

        There is only one concrete type defined in this specification, the
    "bit". A bit represents exactly one machine bit, and is intended to be used
    in an array form to build more complex types.

        Defining a concrete-typed variable requires the usage of a scalar value,
    whatever that may look like.

    7.2 IDENTIFIER

        There is only one identifier type defined in this specification, the
    "function" (S 2.3, "Function"). A function type should be defined in the
    following manner;

        <"func"> {<(argument, {{...}}, {"..."})>} {[<specialization>], {...}}

        Defining an identifier-typed variable requires the usage of a code-type
    block value.

    7.3 ALIAS

        There is only one alias type defined in this specification, the "alias".
    This type is to be used for any type, given that type is specified in its
    specialization block. An alias type is defined in the following manner;

        <"alias"(<type>)>

        Defining an alias-typed variable is not allowed nor possible, as they
    are meant to be type definitions only.

    7.4 STRUCTURAL

        There are four structural types defined in this specification, the
    "structure", the "union", the "bitmask", or the "flagset". Each structural
    type's definition protocol is listed below;

        Structure: <"struct"> {[<specialization>]}
        Union:     <"union"> {[<specialization>]}
        Bitmask:   <"bitmask"> {[<specialization>]}
        Flagset:   <"flags"> {[<specialization>]}

        To define a structure or union type, one must provide a declaration-type
    block value, and to define a bitmask or flagset, one must provide a
    list-type block value.

8 VARIABLES

        Variables are defined by this standard to be "any identifier associated
    with a piece of data, explicitly for the purpose of manipulation in some
    way". A variable definition must be formatted in the following manner;

        <identifier:> <type> {= //...}

        A variable can be declared to conform to any defined type. Its value
    must exactly match the specification of that type.

|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
